---
layout: default
title:  "SENG2011 Notes"
date:   2019-11-23 12:15:00 +1100
permalink: uni/2011-notes
category: uni
hidden: true
tags:
  - 2011
  - dafny
  - workshop on reasoning about programs
color: ffeb50
comments: true
---

<small class="written-by">
  Written by <a href="https://github.com/lukakerr">Luka Kerr</a> on November 23, 2019
</small>

## Dafny

Dafny is a Microsoft research project that acts as a static verifier. It translates to Boogie, the backend, which interacts with Z3, a SMT solver.

```c
method Main() {
  assert 1 == 1;
  print "hello, world\n";
}
```

### Correctness

Dafny can prove your code is correct, meaning it can:

- Guarantee array indices stay in bounds
- Guarantee no null dereferences
- Guarantee no division by zero
- Guarantee the program conforms to a specification

### Types

Dafny has various inbuild types:

- `bool` for booleans
- `char` for characters
- `real`, `int`, `nat` for real, unbounded and natural numbers
- `set<T>`, `seq<T>` for immutable finite sets and sequences
- `array<T>` for arrays
- `array2<T>` for 2D arrays
- `object` is a super-type of all reference types

### Methods

Methods in Dafny are like functions or procedures in conventional languages. Input parameters and output arguments are typed as follows:

```c
method Add(x: int, y: int) returns (sum: int)
{
  sum := x + y;
}
```

Input parameters are immutable. A `return` statement is not necessary in a method, but if there is one, it need not have arguments or it must have all the return arguments of the method.

### Functions

Functions in Dafny are only used in verification. They are side effect free and consist of a single expression that yields a value of some type.

```c
function One(): int
{
  1
}
```

### Function Methods

Function methods combine functions and methods, allowing functions to be used in verification and implementation.

```c
function method One(): int
{
  1
}
```

### Predicates

A predicate is used for verification only. It is a special type of function in that it returns a `bool` only.

```c
predicate Sorted(a: array<int>)
reads a
{
  forall j, k :: 0 <= j < k < a.Length ==> a[j] <= a[k]
}
```

#### `Main()`

The main method takes no input parameters and is the entry point of the program.

### Constructs

- `if ... { ... } else { ... }` for conditionals
- `//` or `/* ... */` for comments
- `:=` for assignment
- `==`, `<=`, `>=`, `!=`, `<`, `>` for boolean operations

### Operations

Dafny has various built in operations, including:

- `assert` that evaluates a boolean expression during verification
- `requires` that declares a pre-condition by evaluating a boolean expression during verification
- `ensures` that declares a post-condition by evaluating a boolean expression during verification

```c
method Square(x: int) returns (y: int)
requires x >= 0
ensures y == x*x
{
  y := x*x;
  assert y > x;
}
```

### Arrays

In Dafny, arrays are mutable data structures and are stored on the heap.
The length of an array `a` can be accessed with `a.Length`, and array indexes range from `0` to `a.Length - 1`.

Arrays are created with the `new` keyword: `var a: array<char> := new char[5];`.

#### `modifies`

To minimise the verifier's work, a `modifies` keyword can be used to tell the verifier that an array will be modified.

#### `reads`

If a _function_ has an array input argument, then a `reads` statement is required.

### Sets

A set `set<T>` is an orderless collection of elements that is immutable.

There are various operations that can be performed on sets

```c
var s1: set<int> := {4, 5, 6};
var s2: set<int> := {1, 2, 3};

s1 != s2   // not equal to comparison
s1 == s2   // equal to comparison
s1 + s2    // set union
s1 * s2    // set intersection
s1 - s2    // set difference
s1 <= s2   // s1 subset of s2
s1 < s2    // s2 proper subset of s2
5 in s1    // in membership
5 !in s2   // not in membership
|s1|       // size of s1
```

### Sequences

A sequence `seq<T>` is an ordered set of elements that is immutable.

There are various operations that can be performed on sequences

```c
var s1: seq<int> := [4, 5, 6];
var s2: seq<int> := [1, 2, 3];

s1 != s2    // not equal to comparison
s1 == s2    // equal to comparison
s1 + s2     // sequence union
s1[0..n]    // slice of s1 from 0 to n
5 in s1     // in membership
5 !in s2    // not in membership
|s1|        // size of s1
s1[i := v]  // update s1 with s1[i] := v
```

### Quantifiers

#### `forall`

The quantifier `forall` is generally used on finite data structures such as arrays.

The syntax is `forall k :: 0 <= k < a.Length ==> a[k] != 7`. It is comparable to $\forall$ in logic.

#### `exists`

The quantifier `exists` is similar to `forall`.

The syntax is `exists k :: 0 <= k < a.Length && a[k] != 7`. It is comparable to $\exists$ in logic.

### Invariants

The Hoare triple $\\{ P \\} \ LOOP \ \\{ Q \\}$ represents a loop. An invariant $I$ is a predicate expression that defines what does not change in a loop.

```c
assert P;    // P is true on entry
while B
invariant I
{
  s1;
  s2;
  ...;
}
assert Q;    // Q is true on exit
```

We see that

- On entry to the loop $P \implies I$
- Inside the loop $\\{ I \land B \\} \ s_1; s_2; \dots \ \\{ I \\}$
- On exit from the loop $I \land \neg B \implies Q$

### `old()`

Arrays are mutable and may change in a method. In a post-condition or assert, you often want to specify this change to the array.

The method `old()` takes an expression and returns the value that expression had on entry to the method. This can be used to check whether values have changed.

### `fresh()`

Dafny has the notion of a frame. A method's frame is the external data that the method is allowed to modify. A function's frame is the external data that the function is allowed to read.

A `fresh()` clause in the postcondition tells calling methods that an object is new (and hence can be trusted).

### `assume`

The `assume` statement allows for a logical proposition to be specified that Dafny may assume to be true without proof. If in fact the proposition is not true this may lead to invalid conclusions.

Using an assume statement disables compilation. Assuming true something that Dafny knows is true, does not affect verification, but assuming true something that Dafny knows is false, makes verification meaningless.

### Termination

Dafny can prove a program will terminate. To prove terminate, Dafny needs a **variant**, which lets Dafny prove progress and boundedness. The variant must decrease towards a bound.

#### `decreases`

A variant is given by the keyword `decreases`.

```c
while i < n
decreases n - i
invariant 0 <= i <= n
{
  ...;
  i := i + 1;
}
```

```c
function func(i: int): int
decreases i
{
  ...;
  func(i - 1);
}
```

### Classes

Classes are needed to define complex models. They define dynamically allocatable, hidden, mutable data structures.

#### Attributes

Dafny offers many class/method attributes. Many are directives to the underlying theorem prover, some affect the performance of Dafny directly.

- `:autocontracts`
  - Fills much of the dynamic-frames boilerplate into a class
  - Requires a predicate `Valid()`
  - Declares a (dynamic frame) set of objects called `Repr`
  - Automatically inserts `requires Valid(); ensures Valid();`
  - Automatically inserts required `reads` and `modifies` clauses
- `:fuel`
  - Specifies how much "fuel" a function should have, i.e. how many times Z3 is permitted to unfold it's definition
- `:timelimit` and `:timeLimitMultiplier`
  - The verification time limit

#### Methods

Classes have both *static* and *instance* methods.

A *static method*

- Can be called without creating an instance of the class
- Is declared using the keyword `static`
- Is invoked by using a class reference
- Will exist as a single copy for its class
- Cannot access instance methods and instance variables directly

An *instance method*

- Requires an object to be created before it can be called
- Is invoked by using an object reference
- Can access static variables and static methods directly

#### Constructors

Class constructors are optional in Dafny.

```java
class SomeClass {
  constructor()
  {
    ...
  }
}
```

#### Lemmas

Sometimes there are steps of logic required to prove a program correct, but they are too complex for Dafny to discover and use on its own. When this happens, we can often give Dafny assistance by providing a lemma. This is done by declaring a method with the `lemma` keyword. Lemmas are implicitly ghost methods and the ghost keyword cannot be applied to them.

The ensures clause is used to express a property. Lemmas cannot change state but can use local variables, and cannot have side effects or return parameters.

The general form of a lemma is

```haskell
lemma SomeName(x: T)
requires P(x)
ensures Q(x)
{
  body
}
```

If the lemma verifies then we must have `forall x: T :: P(x) ==> Q(x)`.

#### Ghosts

Ghosts are entities that are used in verification only.

- Functions and predicates are ghosts by default
- Lemmas are ghost methods
- Variabls can be ghosts

#### Invariants

Classes can have *class invariants*, which are properties that are maintained throughout the lifecycle of the class.

Conventionally a class invariant is named `Valid()` where

- Every method must maintain `Valid()`
  - It appears in the precondition and postcondition of every method
- A constructor must establish `Valid()`
  - It appears in the postcondition of the constructor

#### Frames

When using the `reads` and `modifies` keywords, we are determining what data is 'visible', i.e. readable and writeable. These visible variable are referred to as a *frame*.

The `reads`/`modifies` clauses must be dynamic, that is they must refer to the same data (objects) that are created at runtime.

##### Dynamic Frames

Dafny uses a idiom that uses sets to make `reads`/`modifies` anonymous. A *dynamic frame* is a ghost variable commonly called `Repr`, and has the type `set<object>`.

Dynamic frames are used in `reads`/`modifies` clauses to declare objects that can be read/modified, but without naming them specifically.

### Inductive Datatypes

Simple datatypes like integers are limited. They do not provide types for complex recursively-defined, data structures, and don't give users the ability create their own datatype.

An inductive datatype is a type whose values are created using type constructors.

```haskell
datatype Colour = Red | White | Blue
datatype Tree = Empty | Node(int, Tree, Tree)
```

Generic inductive datatypes include a type parameter as well.

```haskell
datatype Tree<T> = Empty | Node(T, Tree<T>, Tree<T>)
```

Parameters can also be named.

```haskell
datatype Tree = Empty | Node(value: int, left: Tree, right: Tree)
```

To access the elements (constructors) of an inductive datatypes, you need to use a `match` statement. A match statement evaluates an *expression* whose type is an inductive datatype, and executes the case corresponding to the constructor that was used to create that
expression.

```haskell
datatype Tree = Leaf | Node(int, Tree, Tree)

predicate Search(t: Tree, key: int)
{
  match t
  {
    case Leaf => false
    case Node(v, l, r) => (v == key || Search(l, key) || Search(r, key))
  }
}
```

### High Order Data Structures

There are two kinds of verification of high order data structures

- Program verification on the data structure code
  - Treats the data structure operations as program code
  - Verify operations using pre and post-conditions
  - `Valid()` defines 'correct' actual data
- Ghost verification on a ghost data structure, typically called `shadow`
  - A ghost data structure 'shadows' the implementation data structure
  - Verify operations using pre and post-conditions on the `shadow`
  - As before, `Valid()` defines 'correct' actual data

### Executable `forall`

An executable `forall` is comparable to a for loop in other programming languages. The general syntax is

```haskell
forall x: T | R(x, y) ensures P(x, y) {
  body
}
```

where `x` is bound here, and `y` is not. It can also have more bound variables

```haskell
forall x: T, y: U | R(x, y, z) ensures P(x, y, z) {
  body
}
```

An executable `forall` is actually a generalisation of universal quantification. The body is used to prove the post-condition `P(x)` and it must be finite.

### Algorithms

#### `Search()` Using Linear Search

```c
method Search(a: array<int>, key: int) returns (i: int)
ensures 0 <= i ==> i < a.Length && a[i] == key
ensures i < 0 ==> forall k :: 0 <= k < a.Length ==> a[k] != key
{
  i := 0;
  while i < a.Length
  invariant 0 <= i <= a.Length
  invariant forall k :: 0 <= k < i ==> a[k] != key
  {
    if a[i] == key {
      return;
    }

    i := i + 1;
  }
  
  i := -1;
}
```

#### `Search()` Using Binary Search

```c
method Search(a: array<int>, key: int) returns (i: int)
requires a != null && Sorted(a)
ensures 0 <= i ==> i < a.Length && a[i] == key
ensures i < 0 ==> forall k :: 0 <= k < a.Length ==> a[k] != key
{
  var low, high := 0, a.Length;
 
  while low < high
  invariant 0 <= low <= high <= a.Length
  invariant forall k :: 0 <= k < a.Length && !(low <= k < high) ==> a[k] != key
  {
    var mid := (low+high)/2;
    
    if key > a[mid] {
      low := mid + 1;
    } else if key < a[mid] {
      high := mid;
    } else {
      return mid;
    }
  }
  return -1;
}
```

#### `Sort()` Using Insertion Sort

```c
method Sort(a: array<int>)
requires a != null
requires a.Length > 1
ensures Sorted(a, 0, a.Length)
ensures multiset(a[..]) == multiset(old(a[..]))
modifies a
{
  var up := 1;
  
  while up < a.Length
  invariant 1 <= up <= a.Length
  invariant Sorted(a, 0, up)
  invariant multiset(a[..]) == multiset(old(a[..]))
  {
    var down := up;
    
    while down >= 1 && a[down-1] > a[down]
    invariant 0 <= down <= up
    invariant forall i, j :: 0 <= i < j <= up && j != down ==> a[i] <= a[j]
    invariant multiset(a[..]) == multiset(old(a[..]))
    {
      a[down-1], a[down] := a[down], a[down-1];
      down := down - 1;
    }
    
    up := up + 1;
  }
}
```

#### `Sort()` Using Quicksort

```c
method Sort(a: array<int>, low: int, high: int)
requires a.Length >= 1
requires 0 <= low <= high <= a.Length
requires Sandwich(a, low, high)
ensures Sandwich(a, low, high) 
ensures Sorted(a, low, high) 
decreases high - low
modifies a
{
  if high-low > 1 {
    var pivot := partition(a, low, high);
    Sort(a, low, pivot);
    Sort(a, pivot+1, high);
  }
}

predicate Sorted(a: array<int>, lo: int, hi: int)
requires 0 <= lo <= hi <= a.Length
reads a
{
  forall j, k :: lo <= j < k < hi ==> a[j] <= a[k]
}

predicate Sandwich(a: array<int>, lo: int, hi: int)
reads a
{
  (0 < lo <= hi <= a.Length ==> forall j :: lo <= j < hi ==> a[lo-1] <= a[j]) &&
  (0 <= lo <= hi < a.Length ==> forall j :: lo <= j < hi ==> a[j] < a[hi])
}

predicate PivotOrder(a: array<int>, lo: int, pivi: int, hi: int)
requires 0 <= lo <= pivi < hi <= a.Length
reads a
{
  (forall j :: lo <= j < pivi ==> a[j] < a[pivi]) &&
  (forall j :: pivi < j < hi ==> a[pivi] <= a[j])
}

method Partition(a: array<int>, low: int, high: int) returns (pivi: int)
requires a.Length > 0
requires 0 <= low < high <= a.Length
requires Sandwich(a, low, high)
ensures Sandwich(a, low, high)
ensures 0 <= low <= pivi < high <= a.Length
ensures PivotOrder(a, low, pivi, high)
modifies a
{
  pivi := low;
  var i := low + 1;
  
  while i < high
  invariant low <= pivi < i <= high
  invariant PivotOrder(a, low, pivi, i)
  invariant Sandwich(a, low, high)
  {
    if a[i] < a[pivi] {
      var stor := a[i];
      a[i] := a[i-1];
      var back := i - 1;

      while back > pivi
      invariant a[pivi] > stor
      invariant PivotOrder(a, low, pivi, i+1)
      invariant Sandwich(a, low, high)
      {
        a[back+1] := a[back]; 
        back := back - 1;
      }
      
      a[pivi+1] := a[pivi];
      a[pivi] := stor;
      pivi := pivi + 1;
    }
    
    i := i + 1;
  }
}
```

#### `Partition()`

```c
method Partition(a: array<int>) returns (pi: int)
requires a.Length > 1
ensures 0 <= i < a.Length
ensures Lower(a, pi, pi)
ensures Upper(a, pi, pi) 
ensures multiset(a[..]) == multiset(old(a[..]))
modifies a
{
  var last := a.Length - 1;
  var i := 0;
  var j := last;
  
  while i < j
  invariant 0 <= i <= j <= last
  invariant Lower(a, i, last) && Upper(a, j, last)
  invariant multiset(a[..]) == multiset(old(a[..]))
  {
    while i < j && a[i] < a[last]
    invariant 0 <= i <= j
    invariant Lower(a, i, last)
    {
      i := i + 1;
    }
    
    while i < j && a[j] >= a[last]
    invariant i <= j <= last
    invariant Upper(a, j, last)
    {
      j := j - 1;
    }

    assert i <= j;
    
    if i < j {
      a[i], a[j] := a[j], a[i];
      i := i + 1;
    }
  }
  
  assert i == j;
  a[i], a[last] := a[last], a[i];
  return i;
}

predicate Lower(a: array<int>, i: int, pi: int)
reads a
requires 0 <= i < a.Length && 0 <= pi < a.Length
{
  forall k :: 0 <= k < i ==> a[k] < a[pi]
}

predicate Upper(a: array<int>, j: int, pi: int)
reads a
requires 0 <= j < a.Length && 0 <= pi < a.Length
{
  forall k :: j < k < a.Length - 1 ==> a[k] >= a[pi]
}
```

## Software Engineering

The term **software engineering** was first used in a 1968 NATO conference to indicate a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the production and maintenance of software.

### Problems With Software

There are 6 problems with software

1. Complexity
2. Conformity
3. Flexibility
4. Reliability
5. Abstraction
6. Adaptability

#### Complexity

Software is complex because

- Irregularity
- Infinite state space
- Discrete state space
- No physical laws of abstraction
  - Very difficult to abstract behaviour of software as it is conceptual

#### Conformity

In a world of people, computers and machines, software must conform. The environment is perceived to be fixed, software is supposed to be infinitely flexible. In a changed, new environment it can be difficult to determine what part of the software needs to change.

#### Flexibility

The perception of "being easily changed" leads to

- Frequent request to add new features
- Frequent request to support new hardware

Requests can come during or after development.

#### Reliability

Software is considered 'naturally' bug-prone, unlike hardware.

##### The Pentium Bug

In 1995, a hardware bug in Intel Pentium processors was discovered. It affected the floating point unit (FPU) of the processor, and resulted in an incorrect result from dividing floating point numbers being returned occasionally.

#### Abstraction

You cannot see software, you see only its effects. It is impossible to completely understand large software systems, they are too complex.

Software is abstract and hard to visualise, the best you can do is use a flow chart, use case diagram or a scenario which are very narrow views of behaviour.

#### Adaptability

Continuing advances in hardware place increasing demands on software

#### Arianespace

Arianespace is the world's leading satellite launch company, founded in 1980. It has launched over 600 satellites to date.

##### Ariane 5

In 1996, the Ariane 5 rocket shutdown its own guidance system 36.7 seconds into its launch. 

The software in the rocket used a mix of 64 and 16 bit data. For integer data, conversion required that the input value be less than 32768, otherwise an exception would be generated.

The series of events that lead to the half a billion dollar crash are

1. A computer in the guidance system generated large integer data that could not be converted to 16 bits, and **halted**
2. A backup computer was activated but it ran the same software, had the same problem, and of course also **halted**
3. The guidance system sent a diagnostic message and **shut down**
4. The main computer expected to receive data, and interpreted the message text to mean the rocket was completely **off course**
5. The main computer applied boosters to **radically change direction**
6. The resulting forces caused the rocket to **break up**
7. Observing this, the control tower sent a signal to the rocket to **self destruct**

### Testing

#### Black Box Testing

- Tests the code against the requirements
- Tests the behaviour of the code
- Must always be done

#### White Box Testing

- Makes sure the code is correct (i.e. debugging, verifying)
- Should always be done
- Is never finished
- A hit and miss technique in searchnig for faults
- Very time consuming
- Inefficient, as changes to the code possible break all previous checks

At a *function level*, white box testing can have an infinite number of test cases.

At a *statement level*, there are common testcase strategies that exercise different paths through the code:

- Statement coverage
  - Each *statement* is executed at least once
- Branch coverage (or decision coverage)
  - Each *branch in flow-of-control* is executed at least once
- Predicate coverage (or condition coverage)
  - Every *truth value* of every predicate is tested

In reality, statement coverage is the industry standard. All other forms of coverage are too tedious to implement.

White box testing does have some limitations, specifically:

- Correctness is defined by the output of testcases
- Individual input values must be well chosen
- It is data driven, the code is not really checked
- It is tedious

### Validation & Verification

**Validation** is the process of checking whether the software is consistent with the requirements.

**Verification** is the process of checking whether the software is correct with respect to a specification.

#### Validation

- Always involves execution because it is about the product
- Test the product is doing the 'right thing'
- Subjective at it deals with (human formulated) requirements
- A high level exercise
- Generally done by a dedicated test team

Black box and white box testing are examples of validation.

#### Verification

- Can verify a document, a design, code
- Does not involve execution of code
- Considered low level
- An objective, clinical process
- Generally done by a QA team

Code review, design analysis, static code analysis and proof of correctness are examples of verification.

### Requirements

The most important phases in software development are

- Requirements elicitation
  - Getting the *right product*
- Verification and testing
  - Getting the *code right*

Requirements elicitation may be more important than testing because if the product is wrong, then so is the code.

The requirements heirarchy is structured so that the highest level requirements (business needs) are the level under the root, and the lowest level requirements (programming tasks) are the leaves. The levels inbetween convert the "what" into the "how".

#### Non-Functional Requirements

Non-functional requirements include performance, reliability and maintainability. They specify the operational characteristics of the system.

Generally non-functional requirements are difficult to measure or test. A good design will allow components that do not satisfy the desired operational characteristics be replaced by components that do, without changing the behaviour.

#### Prioritisation

Adding priorities is very important. It means

- You think about the available time
- You think about layering and scoping
- You think about versioning

#### Triage

Requirements prioritisation is often referred to as **triage**. It involves deciding which requirements really matter and those that can wait.

Priorities are denoted using **MoSCoW**:

- **M**ust have requirements (Priority 1)
  - Critical; without which the project will fail
- **S**hould have requirements (Priority 2)
  - Important; implement if there is time, or wait until new version
- **C**ould have requirements (Priority 3)
  - Desirable; worth doing if there is time
- **W**on't have (but would be nice) requirements (Priority 4)
  - Unlikely to be included but may be in a future release
  - A chance to show the direction the system could grow

#### Priority Criticality & Consistency

To determine what's critical you need to talk to the client. There is a trade off between cost of implementation and benefit of the requirement to the business.

The priority of a requirement cannot be lower than the priority of every descendent.

If a requirement depends on another, then that other requirement cannot have a lower priority. Ideally requirements that are dependent should be placed into a single heirarchy.

#### Requirement Ordering

Requirements can be order by _priority_ or by _stakeholder_ order. Priority order is the most natural, but stakeholder order may be cleaner if the system involves stakeholders that have quite different functionality.

### Use Cases

A use case is a written description of how users will perform tasks using your system. It outlines, from a user's point of view, a system's behavior as it responds to a request. Each use case is represented as a sequence of simple steps, beginning with a user's goal and ending when that goal is fulfilled.

Use cases include

- Who is using the system
- What the user want to do
- The user's goal
- The steps the user takes to accomplish a particular task
- How the system should respond to an action

#### Elements

Depending on how much depth and complexity is required, a use case describes a combination of

- **Actor(s)**: anyone or anything that performs a behavior using the system
- **Stakeholder**: someone or something with vested interests in the behavior of the system 
- **Primary Actor**: stakeholder who initiates an interaction with the system to achieve a goal
- **Preconditions**: what must be true or happen before the use case runs
- **Postconditions**: what must be true or happen after the use case runs
- **Triggers**: the event that causes the use case to be initiated
- **Basic Flow**: use case in which nothing goes wrong
- **Alternative Flow(s)**: variations of the basic flow

### Work Breakdown Structure

A Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a hierarchical decomposition of the work to be executed by the project team to

- Accomplish the project objectives
- Create the required deliverables
- Identify the work packages
- Show all the deliverables
- Track costs, progress and performance
- Defines responsibilities
- Identifies where coordination is required

It is a project management technique to define and organise the total scope of a project. 

It uses a hierarchical tree structure. The first level of the WBS defines a set of planned outcomes and should collectively represent 100% of the project scope. At each subsequent level, the children of a node collectively and exclusively represent 100% of the scope of their parent node. The lowest level breaks down to the task level, where a task is usually less than a days work.

Every WBS element consists of an element which contains

- Scope of work, including any deliverables
- Budget
- Responsible person's name

A well designed WBS should be more focused on planned outcomes than planned actions.

Level 1 of the WBS is the most important level. It usually determines the projects costs and schedule, and deliverables are normally outputs of the packages.

#### Types

A WBS may be one or a mixture of any of the following main types

- Deliverable oriented WBS
  - Defines project work in terms of (the components that make up) deliverables
  - Labels are objects/artifacts
- Phased WBS
  - Breaks the project into major phases
  - End of a phase usually indicated by a deliverable
- Organizational WBS
  - Breaks the work into departments/areas of responsibility
- Task oriented WBS
  - Breaks the project into the tasks/actions required to produce each deliverable
  - Labels are actions

#### Project Schedule

A schedule is created from the WBS to ensure the project's objective is accomplished in the time allotted. To create a schedule

- Determine the costs of all resources each activity requires
- Next, determine the critical path (the shortest period in which the project can be completed)
- Then, assign start and end dates to each work package

##### Critical Path Method

The Critical Path Method (CPM) is the sequence of scheduled activities that determines the duration of the project. It is the longest sequence of tasks that must be completed on time to meet the project deadline.

If there is a delay in any task on the critical path, then the whole project will be delayed. Most projects have only one critical path, some have multiple critical paths.

The CPM constructs a model of the project that includes

- A list of all activities required to complete the project (taken from the WBS)
- The time that each activity will take to complete
- The dependencies between the activities

The CPM calculates the

- Longest duration path of activities to completion
- Earliest and latest that each activity can start and finish without making the project longer
- 'Critical' activies (activities on the longest path)
